### CDA Gender Harmony 

#### Overview
This guide provides entry templates to support the representation of sex and gender as proposed in the Gender Harmony logical model in forms that can be unambiguously translated among HL7 V2, CDA, and FHIR representations.
It does not provide a document template, and it does not specify what documents or document sections should contain these templates. The templates can be adopted by any organization that finds them useful, in any way it finds useful. It is expected that the Gender Identity, Pronouns, and Recorded Sex or Gender entries will be contained in a Social History section, but this is not a constraint. The Sex for Clinical Use template has its own rules for where it should be used.
As most guides specify “open” templates, inclusion of these entries where appropriate should be feasible. In open templates, all of the features of the CDA R2 base specification are allowed except as constrained by the templates. By contrast, a closed template specifies everything that is allowed and nothing further may be included.
Open templates allow HL7 implementers to develop additional structured content not defined within any specific guide. HL7 encourages implementers to bring their use cases forward as candidate requirements to be formalized in a subsequent version of the standard to maximize the use of shared semantics.
The Gender Identity template is very similar to an existing template in the C-CDA companion guide, which many may have already implemented. The new template was designed to be compatible with the prior one, so it is feasible to use both template IDs in a template instance, as long as it conforms to both.
Sex for Clinical Use (SFCU) contextualizes clinical operations. It may constrain the execution of a specific intervention or affect the interpretation of a specific result. The target activity scopes the validity of the observation. The complex requirement is to associate the SFCU observation with the appropriate targets.
CDA supports multiple approaches for asserting relationships among entries.
Putting the SFCU observation in a section with the entries it constrains would not imply the required information. Document sections do not carry or imply semantics.
One approach would be to use the Entry Reference template to associate an SFCU with those entries to which it applies. This is a quite flexible approach, but it may rely on a level of sophistication that not all implementers can support, and it makes visual rendering difficult.
The template describes the appropriate approach (using entryRelationship) for establishing context specific to one or more entries, to an encounter, or to the patient generally. This approach leverages context conduction appropriately, and it is a tactic with which many implementers are familiar.
Modeling Approach
To support the content defined in the Gender Harmony logical model in CDA, two primary design approaches were considered: the “core model change” option, where the CDA model would be extended by defining new types and relations in the SDTC extension schema, and the “name-value” option, where templates could be defined to specify data elements as Observations with codes and values.
Both the FHIR and V2 efforts chose to build this information into the core model – as FHIR extensions in FHIR and as a new segment in V2 – because the information processing requirements that those standards support benefit from this proximity. In FHIR, for instance, an extension on Patient is included in the Patient resource instance and is available to any client with access to the Patient, whereas using an Observation would require clients to traverse the Observation reference, and possibly to modify the scope of authorization needed to do so.
CDA does not have this constraint. While the xpath of an Observation entry is longer than the xpath of a Patient property, all of the content of a document is integrally and holistically included in the document. The primary criterion, then, was ease of use and access to the artifacts. Since implementers are familiar with the process of processing clinical statements, their technologies handle additions to these clinical statement templates frequently, and the means of publishing these templates presents the complete design to stakeholders (without requiring inspection of xsd hierarchy), the clinical statement template was judged the most feasible approach.
One concern was translation: would adopting the “name-value” option in CDA create difficulties translating from and to specifications that adopted the “core model change” option? The answer is that the use of the name-value pattern does not add significantly to the complexity of mapping across the specification formats.
#### Semantic Scope
Four of the five elements are patient-specific: limits on their scope can be managed with the effectiveTime property. Sex for Clinical Use, however, can be scoped to specific procedures, observations, encounters, and other objects. Methods for associating this observation with its targets are outlined in the template description.
 
Notes for balloters
1. Is more directive guidance warranted for what kinds of artifacts may include these entry templates?
2. Is “derivationExpr” an appropriate representation of a natural language definition, or should that property of Recorded Sex or Gender be another sub-entry?
3. Every effort has been made to ensure that Sex for Clinical Use is flexible enough to support a variety of use cases. However, the cases tend to fall into two classes: reference ranges for interpreting findings and context constraining the execution of a procedure. The latter is rare in clinical documents. Is this level of flexibility necessary or appropriate for this context?
 


<embed src="pdf/RepresentingSexandGender.pdf" width="100%" height="4200px" />
