## Gender Harmony Project Feedback Survey Summary Report
The Gender Harmony Project Feedback Survey Summary Report can be downloaded here.

The survey entitled “HL7’s Gender Harmony Project Feedback Survey” was a 2020 work product generated by the Gender Harmony Work Group (GHWG) to elicit feedback to proposed vocabulary from the LGBTQIA+ community, clinical and technical stakeholders. Much of the end product was informed based on input gathered through this survey.

The survey was created and managed by Roz Queen, GHWG Member and hosted by Survey Monkey. The survey asked for input on the GHWG proposed set of values when recording Gender Identity in clinical systems. The survey was open until September 30, 2020. Survey participants were informed that the GHWG defines Gender Identity as “an individual’s personal sense of being a man, woman, boy, girl, or something else.” Proposed values were provided, with values highlighted yellow, being the minimum binding for any/all conformant systems.

<style>
    table, th, td {
        border: 1px solid black;
    }
</style>
<table>
    <thead>
        <tr>
            <th colspan="3">
                Table 1. Gender Harmony Project, 2020 Vocabulary Feedback Survey Questions
            </th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>
                Survey Question
            </th>       
            <th>
                Response Type
            </th>
            <th>
                Qualitative Observations/Range*
            </th>
        </tr>
    </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr>
            <td>
                Q1 Is the gender table accurate?
            </td>
            <td>
                Likert-scale (1 - 5)
            </td>
            <td>
                90 responses, from 9% very inaccurate to 29% very accurate
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                Q2 Is the gender table list of values complete?
            </td>
            <td>
                Likert-scale
            </td>
            <td>
                87 responses, from 10% not complete at all to 30% very complete
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                Q3 How do you feel about the gender table?
            </td>
            <td>
                Open-ended question (O-ER)
            </td>
            <td>
                48 responses, from incomplete, incorrect, confusing (48%) to too complex (31%) and upkeep concern (19%).
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                Q4 Should this value set include “Girl” and “Boy”?
            </td>
            <td>
                Likert-scale (Y, N, Other), O-ER (“specify”)
            </td>
            <td>
                88 responses; where 61% indicated “No”, 20% indicated “Yes” and 18% specified “Other”
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                Q5 What data elements would you like to see modified? And how?
            </td>
            <td>
                O-ER
            </td>
            <td>
                48 responses; 56% with respect to gender terms/terminology (various concerns)
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                Q6 What needs improvement? Please mention specific section(s) and/or definition(s)
            </td>
            <td>
                O-ER
            </td>
            <td>
                46 responses; where sentiment analysis revealed the majority of opinions were negative
            </td>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <td>
                Q7 Other comments and/or suggestions
            </td>
            <td>
                O-ER
            </td>
            <td>
                Sentiment analysis illustrated the majority of opinions were negative (84.90% confidence)
            </td>
        </tr>
    </tbody>
</table>
*  *Please see report for complete analysis and annotations, too complex to provide in summary view.*

Raw survey data is closed to public viewing.

Clair Kronk, a medical informatician, and Andrea JCL Downey, Lead, 2020 Vocabulary Survey Sub- Committee, conducted the review.

For “fixed” answer responses, quantitative analysis was performed. For “open-ended” responses, both quantitative and qualitative analysis was conducted. A total of 7 questions were analyzed and quantitative analysis graphs produced.

The analysis produced a number of survey design and execution observations which ranged from increasing the sample size in future surveys to putting metrics in place to track where the survey is promoted/distributed. The lack of general sentiment collection and/or respondent demographics was also noted as limiting.

Respondent feedback ranged from the need for more culturally-specific identity terms, definitions for all terms, designing hierarchical classifications systems and providing free-text capacity in clinical EMR data collection. Inclusivity beyond Eurocentric terms to embrace cultural difference/nuance was also noted.

It was noted that creating/adopting a new set of more descriptive tables in accordance with HL7 guidelines is a necessary first step before running a new survey.

Therefore the results of this report should be considered preliminary, at best.

Three recommendations were proposed as outcomes of the Survey Review, and the Gender Harmony Work Group adopted Option 2, to adopt the HL7 Balloting Sub-Committee suggested approach which takes into consideration Clair Kronk’s (2020) Suggested Tables 1, 2, 4 & 6 version 3.3 in Google Docs [81] (please see Appendix 4 for details).

The reader is encouraged to read the complete HL7 Gender Harmony Project Feedback Survey Summary Report under Useful Links on the Work Group’s Confluence Portal.